Provider Ingestion Pipeline
============================

This page documents the complete **three-stage provider ingestion workflow**
that turns external supplier catalog data into trusted entries in the Vancouver
PoC database. If you want to import species from a source provider, follow these
three stages in order.

.. tip::
   The full set of detailed docs lives under ``provider-sandbox``,
   ``provider-approvals``, and ``provider-review-workflow``.
   This page gives the big picture; linked sections have step-by-step commands.

Stage 1: Scrape & Build Review Bundle
-------------------------------------

**Goal:** Pull raw data from a provider's website into a sandbox directory,
then generate an expert review app from that sandbox.

Steps:

1. **Install the workflow extra (one-time setup):**

   .. code-block:: console

      python -m pip install -e .[workflow]

2. **Run the provider source-review workflow** for your chosen provider
   (``PROV-NWM``, ``PROV-WCS``, ``PROV-OAKSUMMIT``, or ``PROV-SATIN``):

   .. code-block:: console

      .\scripts\build-provider-source-review.cmd PROV-XXXX -OpenReview

   Or generate a FreshForge workflow YAML file first if you need custom
   parameters:

   .. code-block:: console

      bc-nppd generate-provider-source-workflow PROV-XXXX \
        --catalog-url https://example.com/seeds \
        --out-path examples/workflows/providers/PROV-XXXX.yaml \
        --force

3. The workflow fetches catalog pages, populates sandbox artifacts
   (``candidate_species.csv``, ``supplier_availability.csv``, etc.), and opens
   a static review app at ``outputs/provider_approval_review/PROV-XXXX/index.html``.

**Output of Stage 1:** A sandbox directory tree in ``outputs/provider_sandbox_source_sweep/PROV-XXXX/`` and a review app with an ``approval_manifest.csv`` download button.

**See also:** :doc:`provider-review-workflow` for full command examples,
and :doc:`provider-sandbox` for the sandbox contract schema.


Stage 2: Review & Approve
-------------------------

**Goal:** A human expert inspects candidate rows in the review app and
exports an approval manifest containing only the species/attributes to accept.

Steps:

1. **Open the review app** generated by Stage 1 (usually auto-opens with
   ``-OpenReview``). The app groups candidates by botanical name and shows:

   * whether the candidate matches an existing Vancouver PoC species;
   * supplier availability rows;
   * candidate attribute rows;
   * provisional mowability rows;
   * provider URLs and taxonomy flags.

2. **Inspect, search, filter, and batch-decide** each candidate species:

   * ``approved`` — ready to enter the PoC;
   * ``rejected`` — should stay out;
   * ``deferred`` — not ready for decision;
   * ``needs_source_review`` — provenance insufficient;
   * ``needs_taxonomy_review`` — name review needed.

3. **Download or copy** ``approval_manifest.csv`` from the review app.

4. **Validate** the manifest before applying:

   .. code-block:: console

      bc-nppd validate-provider-approvals path/to/approval_manifest.csv --json

5. **(Optional) Preview dry-run:** Apply to ignored outputs before committing:

   .. code-block:: console

      .\scripts\apply-downloaded-provider-approval.cmd -OpenPreview

   Or for cumulative multi-provider preview:

   .. code-block:: console

      .\scripts\apply-downloaded-provider-approval.cmd `
        -ManifestPaths \
          outputs/provider_approval_review/PROV-NWM/approval_manifest.csv,\
          outputs/provider_approval_review/PROV-WCS/approval_manifest.csv \
        -OpenPreview

**Output of Stage 2:** A validated ``approval_manifest.csv`` with statuses like
``approved``, ``rejected``, and ``deferred``. Only ``approved`` rows will be
imported.

**See also:** :doc:`provider-approvals` for manifest columns and validation,
and :doc:`provider-review-workflow` for the review app interface.


Automated Sandbox Import Preview
--------------------------------

For smoke tests, fixture-backed provider runs, or intentionally unsupervised
preview builds, ``bc-nppd`` can combine the three stages into one ignored
output. This command scrapes or reads provider pages into sandbox tables,
auto-approves every non-excluded candidate species, includes linked supplier
availability, candidate attribute, and mowability rows, and applies the
provider sandboxes cumulatively:

.. code-block:: console

   bc-nppd auto-import-provider-sandboxes \
     PROV-NWM PROV-WCS PROV-PREMIER \
     --input-dir tests/fixtures/providers \
     --poc-dir data/poc/vancouver \
     --out-dir outputs/provider_auto_import_vancouver \
     --sandbox-root outputs/provider_sandbox_auto_import \
     --json

Use ``--live-fetch`` only when provider robots policy permits the configured
fetch. If robots policy blocks a provider URL, the command stops with
diagnostics rather than bypassing the review contract. Generated sandboxes and
preview products belong in ignored ``outputs/`` or ``local/`` paths unless the
maintainer explicitly promotes reviewed artifacts. The generated
``provider_data/`` directory preserves provider-side candidate species,
candidate attributes, supplier availability, and mowability tables alongside
the auto-approved manifest.


Stage 3: Import into Vancouver PoC
----------------------------------

**Goal:** Apply approved rows to update existing species or add new ones in the
Vancouver PoC database, regenerating downstream artifacts (evidence, usability,
pollinator).

Steps:

1. **Dry-run preview (recommended):** Apply approved manifest into ignored outputs:

   .. code-block:: console

      bc-nppd apply-provider-approval-sequence path/to/approval_manifest.csv \
        --poc-dir data/poc/vancouver \
        --out-dir outputs/provider_approved_vancouver \
        --json

   Inspect ``outputs/provider_approved_vancouver/`` to verify changes look correct.

2. **Promote the manifest** (optional, for audit trail):

   Copy the approved manifest into a tracked reviewed path:

   .. code-block:: console

      mkdir -p data/poc/vancouver/provider_data/reviewed_manifests/
      cp path/to/approval_manifest.csv \
         data/poc/vancouver/provider_data/reviewed_manifests/

3. **Apply to tracked product data** (final step, after human verification):

   .. code-block:: console

      bc-nppd apply-provider-approvals path/to/approval_manifest.csv \
        --poc-dir data/poc/vancouver \
        --out-dir data/poc/vancouver/provider_data \
        --json

   This command updates plant lists, source attribution tables, and regenerates
   evidence hardening, usability layer, and pollinator module artifacts.

4. **Verify the import:**

   .. code-block:: console

      bc-nppd validate-vancouver-poc-list data/poc/vancouver --json
      bc-nppd generate-vancouver-usability data/poc/vancouver \
        --out-dir outputs/provider_approved_vancouver --json

**Output of Stage 3:** Updated Vancouver PoC with new or revised species entries,
new source attribution records, and refreshed downstream artifacts.

**See also:** :doc:`provider-approvals` for the apply command reference,
and :doc:`vancouver-poc-list` for the PoC schema.


Complete Three-Stage Workflow Example (PROV-NWM)
------------------------------------------------

Here's the full pipeline for one provider in sequence:

.. code-block:: console

   # Stage 1 — Scrape & review app
   .\scripts\build-provider-source-review.cmd PROV-NWM -OpenReview

   # Stage 2 — Review in the web app, then download approval_manifest.csv

   # Stage 2b — Validate manifest
   bc-nppd validate-provider-approvals ~/Downloads/approval_manifest.csv --json

   # Stage 3a — Dry-run preview
   .\scripts\apply-downloaded-provider-approval.cmd -OpenPreview

   # Stage 3b — Final apply (after verification)
   bc-nppd apply-provider-approval-sequence ~/Downloads/approval_manifest.csv \
     --poc-dir data/poc/vancouver \
     --out-dir outputs/provider_approved_vancouver \
     --json


Available Source Providers
--------------------------

Five default providers are preconfigured:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: auto

   * - Provider ID
     - Provider Name
     - Status in Vancouver PoC
   * - ``PROV-SATIN``
     - Satinflower Nurseries
     - Imported in tracked PoC
   * - ``PROV-NWM``
     - Northwest Meadowscapes
     - Imported in tracked PoC
   * - ``PROV-WCS``
     - West Coast Seeds
     - Imported in tracked PoC
   * - ``PROV-OAKSUMMIT``
     - Oak Summit Nursery
     - Imported in tracked PoC
   * - ``PROV-PREMIER``
     - Premier Pacific Seeds
     - Imported in tracked PoC

The tracked Vancouver PoC was promoted on 2026-07-07 from the all-provider
automated provider pathway. It validates at 493 plant rows with provider data
from Satinflower, Northwest Meadowscapes, West Coast Seeds, Premier Pacific
Seeds, and Oak Summit Nursery. Provider-derived observations remain
candidate/pending review data.


Notes and Caveats
-----------------

* Provider observations enter the PoC as **candidates**, not facts. They must
  pass through Stage 2 review before being imported.
* Mowability from providers is a provisional 0–5 candidate signal; it does not
  make ecological scores ready until independently verified.
* West Coast Seeds vegetable rows are excluded automatically by Vancouver
  eligibility rules (see :doc:`provider-sandbox`).
* The review app is static and dependency-free — no server, database, or login
  required. It runs from a single HTML file.
